feat: benchmarking etcd storage in Kubernetes cluster (#60)
mesosphere/d2iq-engineering-blog: content/posts/etcd-performance-benchmarking/index.md

---
authors: ["azhovan"]
title: "Etcd Performance Benchmarking"
date: 2023-03-10T17:13:12+01:00
featured: false
tags: ["d2iq", "etcd", "kubernetes"]
excerpt: make sure your etcd server running on reliable storage
feature_image: feature.png
---

# Is your etcd fast enough?

> It is very likely when you are going to install your kubernetes management platform of choice you'll get a hardware recommendation, similar to what [we recommend to you in D2iQ](https://docs.d2iq.com/dkp/2.4/resource-requirements).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is very likely when you are going to install your Kubernetes management platform of choice you will get a hardware recommendation, similar to what [we recommend to you in D2iQ](https://docs.d2iq.com/dkp/2.4/resource-requirements).
```

> It is very likely when you are going to install your Kubernetes management platform of choice you will get a hardware recommendation, similar to what [we recommend to you in D2iQ](https://docs.d2iq.com/dkp/2.4/resource-requirements).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you install the Kubernetes management platform of your choice, there are certain minimal hardware requirements you need to meet. At D2iQ, for example, we have [this requirements](https://docs.d2iq.com/dkp/2.4/resource-requirements).
```

> Although these hardware recommendations are great to help you, they never go beyond capacity, for example it might be suggested to use 2 cores cpu and 2GB of RAM but you'll never know how fast the CPU should be or etc. One reason might be because modern hardwares is good enough in terms of performance or we just can trust the provider and select its recommendation (i.e [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although these hardware recommendations are great to help you, they never go beyond capacity, for example it might be suggested to use two CPU cores and 2GB of RAM but you will never know how fast the CPU should be.  One reason might be because modern hardwares is good enough in terms of performance or we just can trust the provider and select its recommendation (i.e [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).
```

> Although these hardware recommendations are great to help you, they never go beyond capacity, for example it might be suggested to use two CPU cores and 2GB of RAM but you will never know how fast the CPU should be.  One reason might be because modern hardwares is good enough in terms of performance or we just can trust the provider and select its recommendation (i.e [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).

Reviewer 2: I changed the meaning a bit here, but feel free to adapt if I am not targeting what you meant to say :)
```suggestion
These hardware recommendations provide a great help and starting point, but they don’t tell you anything about the maximum capacity. For example, the platform might suggest to use two CPU cores and 2 GB of RAM, but you will never really know the CPU’s real performance.
```

Reviewer 2: New suggestion
Changed the order of the ideas a bit and tried to make the differences in CPUs surface better.

```suggestion
These hardware recommendations provide a great help and starting point, but they don’t tell you anything about the actual performance of your specific CPU cores. We never seem to question the hardware’s performance. Possibly because we trust modern hardware to perform well enough, or trust the cloud provider and follow their recommendations (i.e. [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).

However, the actual performance might differ depending on the CPU's brand, frequency, and other specifications. For example, if a platform provider suggests setting up two CPU cores and two GB of RAM, those exactly same resources could perform differently depending on different CPU brands and types.
```

> Most likely when you are reading this article you already have your cluster up and running so we do not explore options that should be considered before choosing your hardwares, but rather make sure your existing ones perform at expected level. In perticular our focus is storage. You may have different stateful applications like MySQL, etc, those are also beyond the scope of this article as our focus is mainly on Kubernetes itself.

Reviewer 2: I changed the meaning a bit here, but feel free to adapt if I am not targeting what you meant to say :)
```suggestion
These hardware recommendations provide a great help and starting point, but they don’t tell you anything about the maximum capacity. For example, the platform might suggest to use two CPU cores and 2 GB of RAM, but you will never really know the CPU’s real performance.
```

> Most likely when you are reading this article you already have your cluster up and running so we do not explore options that should be considered before choosing your hardwares, but rather make sure your existing ones perform at expected level. In perticular our focus is storage. You may have different stateful applications like MySQL, etc, those are also beyond the scope of this article as our focus is mainly on Kubernetes itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most likely, as you are reading this article, you already have your cluster up and running. So you are not really exploring other hardware options, but you rather want to ensure that your existing hardware is performing at the expected level. In this particular article, our focus is storage in the context of **Kubernetes** itself. You may have different stateful applications like MySQL, but those are beyond the scope of this article.
```
Maybe we could be a bit more specific on the "storage of Kubernetes itself"? Maybe Kubernetes objects?

> Most likely when you're reading this article you've already have your cluster up and running so we don't explore options that should be considered before choosing your hardwares, but rather make sure your existing ones perform at expected level. In perticular our focus is storage. You may have different stateful applications like mysql, etc, those are also beyond the scope of this article as our focus is mainly on kubernetes itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most likely when you are reading this article you already have your cluster up and running so we do not explore options that should be considered before choosing your hardwares, but rather make sure your existing ones perform at expected level. In perticular our focus is storage. You may have different stateful applications like MySQL, etc, those are also beyond the scope of this article as our focus is mainly on Kubernetes itself.
```

Author: thanks!

## etcd

> [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster and it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly been impacted.

Reviewer 2: [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster, therefore it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd instance with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly being impacted.

> [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster and it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly been impacted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster, therefore it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd instance with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly being impacted.
```

> [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all kubernetes resources in a cluster and it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience has been impacted significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster and it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly been impacted.
```

> If you see following logs in your etcd server, it is important to not ignore them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see following statements in your etcd server logs, it is important to not ignore them
```

> If you see following statements in your etcd server logs, it is important to not ignore them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you see the following or similar messages in your etcd server logs, it is important that you do not ignore them.
```

>  etcdserver: read-only range request … took too long (xxxx) to execute

> This is an indicator that etcd is not performing well and based on [official documentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean) this is usually caused by:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such messages are indicators that etcd is not performing well and based on [etcd’s official documentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean) this is usually caused by:
```

- Contention between etcd and other apps

> - Disk is slow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Slow disk
```

- CPU starvation

## Benchmarking via etcd metrics

> For real time monitoring and debugging you can use etcd metrics. etcd [reports](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/metrics/) some **metrics** to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) that can help you distinguish between the above cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For real time monitoring and debugging, you can use etcd metrics. etcd [reports](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/metrics/) some **metrics** to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) that can help you distinguish between the above cases:
```

- **wal\_fsync\_duration\_seconds**
- **backend\_commit\_duration\_seconds**

> First one is called before applying changes to disk, and second one is after applying changes to disk. it doesn't matter which one you choose, just keep in mind high values for these metrics mean high disk operation latencies and indicate disk issues.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First one is called before applying changes to disk, and second one is after applying changes to disk. It does not matter which one you choose, just keep in mind high values for these metrics mean high disk operation latencies and indicate disk issues.  
```

Author: thanks!

> As [etcd doc suggests](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean) that 99th percentile duration should be less than **25 ms** for storage in order to be considered fast enough.

Reviewer 2: optional: 
```suggestion
As the [etcd documentation suggests](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean), the 99% of the duration should be less than **25 ms** for storage to be considered fast enough.
```

## Benchmarking via Fio

> If you're running etcd on Linux machines another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio) which is a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running etcd on Linux machines another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio) which is a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.
```

> If you are running etcd on Linux machines another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio) which is a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are running etcd on Linux machines, another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio), a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.
```

**Step 1: Install required packages**

```bash 
apt install -y gcc zlib1g-dev make git  
```

**Step 2: Clone the fio repo and install it**
```bash 
git clone git://git.kernel.dk/fio.git && cd fio
./configure
make 
make install   
  ```

**Step3: Configure fio**

`test-dir` is a directory under the storage device you want to test

 ```bash 
export PATH=/usr/local/bin:$PATH  
fio --rw=write --ioengine=sync --fdatasync=1 --directory=test-dir --size=22m --bs=2300 --name=mytest  
  ```

> following is the output from etc node of D2iQ cluster running on an AWS ec2 instance type of `m5.xlarge`. check the 99th percentile of `fdatasync`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following is the output from etc node of D2iQ cluster running on an AWS ec2 instance type of `m5.xlarge`. Check the 99th percentile of `fdatasync`!
```

 ```bash 
 fsync/fdatasync/sync_file_range:
   sync (usec): min=534, max=15766, avg=1273.08, stdev=1084.70
   sync percentiles (usec):
   |...,
   | 99.00th=[ 6376], 99.50th=[ 9634], 99.90th=[15795], 99.95th=[15795],
``` 

> you can see that the 99th percentile is 6376 or about 6.3ms of latency which is an acceptable latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that the 99th percentile is 6376 or about 6.3ms of latency which is an acceptable latency.
```

> You can see that the 99th percentile is 6376 or about 6.3ms of latency which is an acceptable latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see that the 99th percentile is 6376 or about 6.3ms of latency, which is an acceptable latency.
```
Is it possible to add a reference value of a latency that would not be acceptable? Or would engs reading the blog know right away?

---
authors: ["azhovan"]
title: "Etcd Performance Benchmarking"
date: 2023-03-10T17:13:12+01:00
featured: false
tags: ["d2iq", "etcd", "kubernetes"]

> excerpt: make sure your etcd server running on reliable storage

Reviewer 2: Just a couple suggestions: 
```suggestion
excerpt: Ensure your etcd server is running on reliable storage
```

```suggestion
excerpt: Evaluate the performance of your etcd cluster
```

```suggestion
excerpt: Ensure your etcd cluster is running on reliable storage
```

feature_image: feature.png
---

# Is your etcd fast enough?

When you install the Kubernetes management platform of your choice, there are certain minimal hardware requirements you need to meet. At D2iQ, for example, we have [this requirements](https://docs.d2iq.com/dkp/2.4/resource-requirements).

> These hardware recommendations provide a great help and starting point, but they don’t tell you anything about the actual performance of your hardware. We never seem to question the hardware’s performance. Possibly because we trust modern hardware to perform well enough, or trust the cloud provider and follow their recommendations (i.e. [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These hardware recommendations provide a great help and starting point, but they don’t tell you anything about the actual performance of your hardware. We never seem to question the hardware’s performance. Possibly because we trust modern hardware to perform well enough, or trust the cloud provider and follow their recommendations (for an example, see [aws recommendations](https://aws.amazon.com/intel/#Instance_Types)).
```

> However, the actual performance might differ depending on the CPU's brand, frequency, and other specifications. For example, if a platform provider suggests setting up two CPU cores and two GB of RAM, those exactly same resources could perform differently depending on different CPU brands and types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the actual performance might differ depending on the CPU's brand, frequency, and other specifications. For example, if a platform provider suggests setting up two CPU cores and two GB of RAM, those exactly same resources could perform differently depending on the CPU brand and type.
```

Most likely, as you are reading this article, you already have your cluster up and running. So you are not really exploring other hardware options, but you rather want to ensure that your existing hardware is performing at the expected level. In this particular article, our focus is storage in the context of **Kubernetes** itself. You may have different stateful applications like MySQL, but those are beyond the scope of this article.

> ## etcd

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## etcd

```

[etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd)(pronounced et-see-dee) is the primary datastore of Kubernetes. It is a critical component that stores all Kubernetes resources in a cluster, therefore it is very important that etcd operations are performed at an ideal speed. Having an etcd instance with poor performance is a clear indicator that your customer's experience is significantly being impacted.

If you see the following or similar messages in your etcd server logs, it is important that you do not ignore them:

>  etcdserver: read-only range request … took too long (xxxx) to execute

> Such messages are indicators that etcd is not performing well and based on [etcd’s official documentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean) this is usually caused by:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such messages are indicators that etcd is not performing well and based on [etcd’s official documentation](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean), this is usually caused by:
```

- Contention between etcd and other apps
- Slow disk
- CPU starvation

> ## Benchmarking via etcd metrics

Reviewer 2: Missing line 
```suggestion
## Benchmarking via etcd metrics

```

> For real time monitoring and debugging, you can use etcd metrics. etcd [reports](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/metrics/) some **metrics** to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) that can help you distinguish between the previous cases:

Reviewer 2: WDYT about the emphasis being on metrics?
```suggestion
For real time monitoring and debugging, you can use etcd metrics. etcd reports [**metrics**](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/metrics/) to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) that can help you distinguish between the previous cases:
```

- **wal\_fsync\_duration\_seconds**
- **backend\_commit\_duration\_seconds**

The first metric is reported before applying changes to a disk, and the second one is reported after applying changes to a disk. It does not matter which one you choose, just keep in mind that high values for these metrics mean high disk operation latencies and disk issues.  
As the [etcd documentation suggests](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean), the 99th percentile duration should be less than **25 ms** for storage to be considered fast enough.

> ## Benchmarking via Fio

Reviewer 2: Missing line after title 
```suggestion
## Benchmarking via Fio

```

If you are running etcd on Linux machines, another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio), a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.

**Step 1: Install required packages**

```bash 
apt install -y gcc zlib1g-dev make git  
```

**Step 2: Clone the fio repo and install it**
```bash 
git clone git://git.kernel.dk/fio.git && cd fio
./configure
make 
make install   
  ```

**Step3: Configure fio**

`test-dir` is a directory under the storage device you want to test

 ```bash 
export PATH=/usr/local/bin:$PATH  
fio --rw=write --ioengine=sync --fdatasync=1 --directory=test-dir --size=22m --bs=2300 --name=mytest  
  ```

> The following output is an example from an etcd node of a D2iQ cluster running on an AWS ec2 instance type of `m5.xlarge`. Check the 99th percentile of `fdatasync`!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following output is an example from an etcd node of a D2iQ cluster running on an AWS ec2 instance of type `m5.xlarge`. Check the 99th percentile of `fdatasync`!
```

---
authors: ["azhovan"]
title: "Etcd Performance Benchmarking"
date: 2023-03-10T17:13:12+01:00
featured: false
tags: ["d2iq", "etcd", "kubernetes"]
excerpt: Ensure your etcd server is running on reliable storage

> feature_image: feature.png

Reviewer: Your feature.png has a resolution of 1000x333. We are trying to go for 2000x1000. The focal point should be centered. You could simply change the canvas size with a white background as one way.

- Contention between etcd and other apps
- Slow disk
- CPU starvation

## Benchmarking via etcd metrics

For real time monitoring and debugging, you can use etcd metrics. etcd reports [**metrics**](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/metrics/) to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) that can help you distinguish between the previous cases:

- **wal\_fsync\_duration\_seconds**
- **backend\_commit\_duration\_seconds**

The first metric is reported before applying changes to a disk, and the second one is reported after applying changes to a disk. It does not matter which one you choose, just keep in mind that high values for these metrics mean high disk operation latencies and disk issues.  
As the [etcd documentation suggests](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean), the 99th percentile duration should be less than **25 ms** for storage to be considered fast enough.

## Benchmarking via Fio

If you are running etcd on Linux machines, another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio), a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.

**Step 1: Install required packages**

```bash 

> apt install -y gcc zlib1g-dev make git  

Reviewer: This would work on Debian derived systems only. 

We could either show more options (min: RedHat `dnf`, maybe even: Suse `ZYpp`)  or 
go fully generic (wget, tar xzf, configure, make) or 
you could describe what binaries (including version) we really need and leave it to the user find the right packages.

---
authors: ["azhovan"]
title: "Etcd Performance Benchmarking"

> date: 2023-04-12T15:13:12+02:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-04-12T12:00:00+02:00
```

- **wal\_fsync\_duration\_seconds**
- **backend\_commit\_duration\_seconds**

The first metric is reported before applying changes to a disk, and the second one is reported after applying changes to a disk. It does not matter which one you choose, just keep in mind that high values for these metrics mean high disk operation latencies and disk issues.  
As the [etcd documentation suggests](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/faq/#what-does-the-etcd-warning-apply-entries-took-too-long-mean), the 99th percentile duration should be less than **25 ms** for storage to be considered fast enough.

## Benchmarking via Fio

If you are running etcd on Linux machines, another way to benchmark your storage performance is to use [Fio](https://github.com/axboe/fio), a very popular package to simulate I/O workload.

### Installation

**Ubuntu**

```shell 
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -y install fio
 ```

**Centos 7**

```shell
sudo yum update 
sudo yum install fio  
```

**openSUSE** and **SLE**

> You can install Fio from the [official page here](https://software.opensuse.org/download/package?package=fio&project=benchmark)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can install Fio from the [official page here](https://software.opensuse.org/download/package?package=fio&project=benchmark).
```

**Other distributions**

> To install Fio on other operating systems, you may visit Fio [github page](https://github.com/axboe/fio#binary-packages) and select your binary from the list there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install Fio on other operating systems, visit Fio [github page](https://github.com/axboe/fio#binary-packages) and select your binary from the list.
```

### Benchmarking

Let's create a new directory and name it`test-dir` under the storage device you want to test. Then run the following command:
 ```bash 
fio --rw=write --ioengine=sync --fdatasync=1 --directory=test-dir --size=22m --bs=2300 --name=mytest  
  ```

The following output is an example from an etcd node of a D2iQ cluster running on an AWS ec2 instance of type `m5.xlarge`. Check the 99th percentile of `fdatasync`!

 ```bash 
 fsync/fdatasync/sync_file_range:
   ...
   sync percentiles (usec):
   |...,
   | 99.00th=[ 6376], 99.50th=[ 9138], 99.90th=[13721], ...
``` 

You can see that the 99th percentile is 9138 or about 9.2ms of latency, which is an acceptable latency.

> For more complex scenarios and also understand how each flag works checkout [Fio command line options](https://github.com/axboe/fio/blob/master/HOWTO.rst) guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To understand how the different flags work or to explore other use cases, see the [Fio command line options](https://github.com/axboe/fio/blob/master/HOWTO.rst) guide.
```
